content/term/disclosable-computing.md, before:

---
title: Disclosable Computing
categories: ["term"]
---

I argue that what the public really wants is **disclosable computing**.

The first error committed by those trying to make the power of computing accessible to the wider public is 
to assume that they want or need this power. Backed up by (Rode et al, 2006)[^1] I consider that what
the public largely would like is some more or less coordinated access to some body of state. Whereas, the first
port of call of any designer of a new kind of computing expression is see what form is taken by a recursive
chestnut such as the [Fibonacci numbers](https://github.com/fharookshaik/fibonacci-series/tree/main/fibonacci_series)
or the factorial function, as if these represented some kind of standard requirement rather than a certain kind of in-joke.

In practice, the public would prefer an environment which does not *readily expose* the fact it is capable of
computation, if indeed it is at all. [Henri Picciotto](https://www.picciotto.org/henri/), a Berkeley Mathematics educator, wrote
in [Boxer: A Teacher's Experience (2022)](https://www.mathed.page/t-and-m/boxer-2022.pdf)
of 19 years of his students' experience with Boxer, that it "defied their expectations of how to interact with their machines",
felt "bland and antiquated", and that by the end that they hated it. I argue a big contributor to this 
is that, despite its many great virtues, 
Boxer has no model for _disclosure_ of its capacity for computation &ndash; the controls for executing and modifying
boxes are always visible.

So it is useful then to look at more popular [substrates](/term/substrate) to see how the process of disclosure
works in them. In the most successful substrates, spreadsheets, this has a very simple form &ndash; the disclosure
that a cell holds a formula rather than a piece of text appears in a text box at the top of the interface when
the cell is focused. The user can look there if they are interested, but otherwise they can focus their eyes where the
cursor is and ignore it. The spreadsheet can be published in a static form without a jarring change resulting from
the fact it is no longer editabls.

![Excel formula bar](/img/excel-disclose.png)

Another interesting substrate, the most recent version 4 of
the [Lively Kernel](https://github.com/LivelyKernel/lively4-core) organises
components in window panes with a standard "hamburger menu" at top left, from which various substrate-oriented activities
are available including "edit":

<img src="/img/lively-disclose.png" width="250px" title="Lively formula bar"/>

Lively kernel components appear as more or less ordinary content but are
imprisoned not only within the overall kernel page host but also within the
component window.

In the most popular rich content platforms such as WordPress, SquareSpace, Wix, and the like, there is no attempt to 
coordinate static and editable views of content &ndash; these appear in different URL spaces, although accessible by
a top widget which appears in an icon bar when one is logged in to the platform.

<img src="/img/wordpress-disclose.png" width="500px" title="WordPress Divi edit button" style="padding:15px"/>

A lovely old substrate, [Hypercard](https://cancel.fm/stuff/share/HyperCard_Script_Language_Guide_1.pdf) 
(and its modern revival, [Decker](https://beyondloom.com/decker/)) have the editing affordances available from a
top menu bar Objects where one chooses to view "Info" of some currently selected item in the interface.

Finally in perhaps the most popular substrate of all, the DOM underlying a web browser's page representation is
accessible (usually) by right clicking a context menu and choosing "Inspect" or else hitting the F12 key.

My goal is for the capabilities of a substrate to be (likely progressively) disclosable in this way, starting from
a view in which it appears as perfectly regular web content, such as that seen in the popular site builders. The huge
majority of users will not be developers, and it is essential that they are untroubled by the computational
aspects of the substrate. Of those users who are developers, the huge majority will be amateur or accidental
developers, and it is essential they are given a view of the substrate that correlates tightly with the users' view,
accessible by some kind of "[magic wand](/public/patent3.png)" gesture directed at parts of it which begins a gentle process
of disclosure. Only the most specialised developers need to become aware that the substrate could perform computation, if it can.



[^1]: Jochen Rode, Jochen et al. End User Development of Web Applications. Chapter 8 in 
[End User Development](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/1-4020-5386-X_8) (2006), p.166 states
"approximately one third of end users' needs could be addressed by a high-level development tool that
offered basic data collection, storage and retrieval functionality. Another 40% of the requests could be
satisfied through customization of five generic web applications (resource reservation, shopping cart and payment,
message board, content management, calendar)"

Commit message:

Clarity tweaks for disclosable computing

content/term/disclosable-computing.md, after:

---
title: Disclosable Computing
categories: ["term"]
---

I argue that what the public really wants is **disclosable computing**.

The first error committed by those trying to make the power of computing accessible to the wider public is 
to assume that they want or need this power. Backed up by (Rode et al, 2006)[^1] I consider that what
the public largely would like is some more or less coordinated access to some body of state. Whereas, the 
designer of a new kind of computational expression usually starts by seeing what form is taken by a recursive
chestnut such as the [Fibonacci numbers](https://github.com/fharookshaik/fibonacci-series/tree/main/fibonacci_series)
or the factorial function, as if these represented some kind of standard requirement rather than a certain kind of in-joke.

In practice, the public would prefer an environment which does not *readily expose* that it is capable of
computation, if indeed it is at all. [Henri Picciotto](https://www.picciotto.org/henri/), a Berkeley Mathematics educator, wrote
in [Boxer: A Teacher's Experience (2022)](https://www.mathed.page/t-and-m/boxer-2022.pdf)
of 19 years of his students' experience with Boxer, that it "defied their expectations of how to interact with their machines",
felt "bland and antiquated", and that by the end that they hated it. I argue a big contributor to this 
is that, despite its many great virtues, 
Boxer has no model for _disclosure_ of its capacity for computation &ndash; the controls for executing and modifying
boxes are always visible.

So it is useful then to look at more popular [substrates](/term/substrate) to see how the process of disclosure
works in them. In the most successful substrates, spreadsheets, this has a very simple form &ndash; the disclosure
that a cell holds a formula rather than a piece of text appears in a text box at the top of the interface when
the cell is focused. The user can look there if they are interested, but otherwise they can focus their eyes where the
cursor is and ignore it. The spreadsheet can be published in a static form without a jarring change resulting from
the fact it is no longer editable.

![Excel formula bar](/img/excel-disclose.png)

Another interesting substrate, the most recent version 4 of
the [Lively Kernel](https://github.com/LivelyKernel/lively4-core), organises
components in window panes with a standard "hamburger menu" at top left, from which various substrate-oriented activities
are available including "edit":

<img src="/img/lively-disclose.png" width="250px" title="Lively formula bar"/>

Lively kernel components appear as more or less ordinary content but are
imprisoned not only within the overall kernel page host but also within their
component window.

In the most popular rich content platforms such as WordPress, SquareSpace, Wix, and the like, there is no attempt to 
coordinate static and editable views of content &ndash; these appear in different URL spaces, although accessible by
a top widget which appears in an icon bar when one is logged in to the platform.

<img src="/img/wordpress-disclose.png" width="500px" title="WordPress Divi edit button" style="padding:15px"/>

A lovely old substrate, [Hypercard](https://cancel.fm/stuff/share/HyperCard_Script_Language_Guide_1.pdf) 
(and its modern revival, [Decker](https://beyondloom.com/decker/)) has the editing affordances available from a
top menu bar Objects where one chooses to view "Info" of some currently selected item in the interface.

Finally in perhaps the most popular substrate of all, the DOM underlying a web browser's page representation, is
accessible (usually) by right clicking a context menu and choosing "Inspect" or else hitting the F12 key.

My goal is for the capabilities of a substrate to be progressively disclosable in this way, starting from
a view in which it appears as perfectly regular web content, such as that seen in the popular site builders. The huge
majority of users will not be developers, and it is essential that they are untroubled by the computational
aspects of the substrate. Of those users who are developers, the huge majority will be amateur or accidental
developers, and it is essential they are given a view of the substrate that correlates tightly with the users' view,
accessible by some kind of "[magic wand](/public/patent3.png)" gesture directed at parts of it which begins a gentle process
of disclosure. Only the most specialised developers need to become aware that the substrate could perform computation, if it can.



[^1]: Jochen Rode, Jochen et al. End User Development of Web Applications. Chapter 8 in 
[End User Development](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/1-4020-5386-X_8) (2006), p.166 states
"approximately one third of end users' needs could be addressed by a high-level development tool that
offered basic data collection, storage and retrieval functionality. Another 40% of the requests could be
satisfied through customization of five generic web applications (resource reservation, shopping cart and payment,
message board, content management, calendar)"
